My name is Jeff Woodyard. I'm an outreach worker with the Overdose Outreach
team based out of Vancouver. The team is primarily focused on helping folks
navigate the healthcare system. We work primarily with folks that either
have experienced an opioid overdose or are at high risk of one.
And currently with the fentanyl crisis, that's basically anybody that uses
anything harder than marijuana or mushrooms. We're very client driven, so
we respond and work with the clients on what they want to work
with. I would say the majority of our work is helping connect folks
to primary care, which is a significant challenge for anybody in the city
of Vancouver. As well as connecting to clinics that offer opioid replacement
therapy, so that can be Suboxone, Methadone, Kadian. Also doing treatment
referrals, detox referrals, it can help people get up on income assistance
if they aren't. We have several social workers in our team
that do PWD applications. And then connecting to other services in the community
as well. We outreach people in the community, engage them where they're
at, and help them with what they want to work on and whatever that
looks like. Anyone can refer to our team, anyone can access our services.
There's no sort of, outside of the substance use, there's no
limitation on who can access our services. We're not just on the Downtown
Eastside, but the majority of our clients are... There's just greater health
needs down here. The team was created in response to the overdose crisis.
It originally started with one guy who's still on our team.
And then we're now expanded up to at least 15 people in Vancouver
alone, and there's teams across the region. You hear the name and I
think people get the assumption that our team is responding in the moment
to overdoses, and that certainly doesn't happen. But basically
what we're trying to do is connect folks to health care so that
a clinic, once they have a relationship with a health care provider,
you can see that the likelihood of an overdose starts to drop if
they get on opioid replacement therapy or if they're on Safe Supply,
or even just taking care of things like infections and colds and flu
and all the sort of stuff that can come.
So I'm starting my week today, and I came into four voicemails from
the same client. The first which was just screaming at me,
and they progressively got a little less intense because I know this client
and I know their behaviour, and I know that they're dealing with incredible
long term years of chronic pain, and when it's really bad,
they are not in a very good space.
And so I don't take those moments personally because
I can't imagine what it's like to live with an open wound for
over a year. I don't know what that's like,
but I do know through my own medical history and things that I've
gone through, what it's like to live with massive amounts of physical pain
and how in that moment all you want is the pain to go
away. My favourite thing about my job to be honest is just like
if I'm driving a client somewhere and we just start chatting and talking
about, for me it's usually sports or music,
and just having these normalising behaviours and to build a relationship
and build rapport. I got a call from a client this morning who
two months ago, our last interaction was him basically, I want nothing to
do with anything to do with the healthcare system, leave me alone,
and there was a lot more explicitives in that.
And today he got a random phone call, he held onto my card
and asked for support getting onto disability, which will involve getting
him connected to primary care, which he was completely against,
and all these kind of things. And so
for better or for worse, in that moment two months ago he was
very angry with me and with the system and stuff, but there was
something about our interactions where he saw me as a safe person that
down the road he could reach out to. And so now
I'm filling out referral forms and starting to build that relationship.
I think once you kind of get past that initial fear,
there is an incredible, incredible community of people and are really, really
have a heart for looking out for each other. You can see actually
what is going on down here and how much these folks matter to
each other and to me.